SQL Tuning: add the page `blocklist-control-plan.md` (#3043)
pingcap/docs: blocklist-control-plan.md

---
title: The Blocklist of Optimization Rules and Expression Pushdown
summary: Learn about the blocklist to control the optimization rules and the behavior of expression pushdown.
category: performance
---

# The Blocklist of Optimization Rules and Expression Pushdown

This document introduces how we use the blocklist of optimization rules and the blocklist of expression pushdown to control the behavior of TiDB.

> ## The Blocklist of Optimization Rules

Reviewer: We use the sentence-style capitalization for headings in the body.
```suggestion
## The blocklist of optimization rules
```

> ### Important Optimization Rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Important optimization rules
```

| Column Pruning | column_prune | One executor will prune the column if it's not needed by the upper executor |
| Decorrelate Subquery | decorrelate | Try to rewrite the correlated subquery to non-correlated join or aggregation |
| Aggregation Elimination | aggregation_eliminate | Try to remove some unnecessary aggregations |
| Projection Elimination | projection_eliminate | Remove unnecessary projects |
| Max/Min Elimination | max_min_eliminate | Rewrite some max/min function in aggregation to the form `order by` + `limit 1` |
| Predicate Pushdown | predicate_push_down | Try to push predicates to the executor that is closer to the data source |
| Outer Join Elimination | outer_join_eliminate | Try to convert the left/right join to inner join |
| Partition Pruning | partition_processor | Pruning partitions which are rejected by the predicates and rewrite to the form `UnionAll + Partition Datasource` |
| Aggregation Pushdown | aggregation_push_down| Try to push aggregations down to their children |
| TopN Pushdown | topn_push_down | Try to push the topn to where is closer to the data source |
| Join Reorder | join_reorder | Decide the order of multi-table joins |

> ### Disable Optimization Rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disable optimization rules
```

- If you want to disable some rules, you can write its name to the table `mysql.opt_rule_blacklist`. e.g.

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    insert into mysql.opt_rule_blacklist values("join_reorder"), ("topn_push_down");
    ```

    Executing the following SQL statement can make the above operation take effect immediately. Including old connections of the corresponding TiDB Server:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    admin reload opt_rule_blacklist;
    ```

    > **Note:**
    >
    > `admin reload opt_rule_blacklist` only takes effect on the TiDB Server which runs this statement. If you need all TiDB Server of the cluster to disable some rules, you need to run this command on each of the TiDB Server.

- If you want to re-enable some rules, delete the corresponding data in the table, and then run `admin reload` statement:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    delete from mysql.opt_rule_blacklist where name in ("join_reoder", "topn_push_down");
    admin reload opt_rule_blacklist;
    ```

> ## The Blocklist of Expression Pushdown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The blocklist of expression pushdown
```

    - The `store_type` `tiflash` decides whether the expression can be executed in TiFlash Server's Coprocessor component.
+ `reason`: To record the reason why this expression is added to the blocklist.

### Usage

#### Add to the blocklist

Using the following procedures if you want to add one or more expressions to the blocklist:

1. Insert the corresponding function name or operator name and the set of components you want to disable the pushdown to the table `mysql.expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

2. Execute `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

### Remove from the blocklist

Using the following procedures if you want to remove one or more expressions from the blocklist:

1. Delete the corresponding function name or operator name and the set of components you want to disable the pushdown from the table `mysql.expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

2. Execute `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

> **Note:**
>
> `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist` only takes effect on the TiDB Server which runs this statement. If you need all TiDB Server of the cluster to disable some rules, you need to run this command on each of the TiDB Server.

> ## Example of the Expression Blocklist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Expression blocklist usage example
```

    ```

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist;
    ```

    ```sql
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
    ```

3. Observe the execution plan again and you will find that both the operator `<` and `>` are not pushed down to TiKV Coprocessor.

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    explain select * from t where a < 2 and a > 2;
    ```

    ```sql
    +-------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
    | id                      | estRows  | task      | access object | operator info                      |
    +-------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
    | Selection_7             | 10000.00 | root      |               | gt(ssb_1.t.a, 2), lt(ssb_1.t.a, 2) |
    | └─TableReader_6         | 10000.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_5               |
    |   └─TableFullScan_5     | 10000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t       | keep order:false, stats:pseudo     |
    +-------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
    ```

> 4. Remove one expression(here is `>`) from the blacklist and execute `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Remove one expression(here is `>`) from the blocklist and execute `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist`.
```

- If you want to disable some rules, write its name to the `mysql.opt_rule_blacklist` table. For example:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    insert into mysql.opt_rule_blacklist values("join_reorder"), ("topn_push_down");
    ```

    Executing the following SQL statement can make the above operation take effect immediately. The effective range includes all old connections of the corresponding TiDB server:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    admin reload opt_rule_blacklist;
    ```

    > **Note:**
    >
    > `admin reload opt_rule_blacklist` only takes effect on the TiDB server where the above statement has been run. If you want all TiDB servers of the cluster to take effect, run this command on each TiDB server.

- If you want to re-enable a rule, delete the corresponding data in the table, and then run the `admin reload` statement:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql

>     delete from mysql.opt_rule_blacklist where name in ("join_reoder", "topn_push_down");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    delete from mysql.opt_rule_blacklist where name in ("join_reorder", "topn_push_down");
```

    | id                      | estRows  | task      | access object | operator info                      |
    +-------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
    | Selection_7             | 10000.00 | root      |               | gt(ssb_1.t.a, 2), lt(ssb_1.t.a, 2) |
    | └─TableReader_6         | 10000.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_5               |
    |   └─TableFullScan_5     | 10000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t       | keep order:false, stats:pseudo     |
    +-------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
    ```

4. Remove one expression (here is `>`) from the blocklist and execute `admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist`.

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    delete from mysql.expr_pushdown_blacklist where name = '>';
    ```

    ```sql
    Query OK, 1 row affected (0.01 sec)
    ```

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    admin reload expr_pushdown_blacklist;
    ```

    ```sql
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
    ```

> 5. Observe the execution plan again and you will find that the `<` and `>` operators can be re-pushed down to TiKV Coprocessor again.

Reviewer: @lzmhhh123 I've confirmed with @winoros that the Chinese meaning should be `重新观察执行计划，可以看到只有 > 表达式被重新下推到 TiKV Coprocessor，< 表达式仍然被禁用下推` and I have updated the Chinese version in https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/3970.
```suggestion
5. Observe the execution plan again and you will find that `<` is not pushed down while `>` is pushed down to TiKV Coprocessor.
```
